Discussion from runtime/issues/12506 (#25529)
dotnet/docs: docs/core/dependency-loading/collect-details.md

## Prerequisites

- [.NET 5.0 SDK](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/download) or later versions

> - [`dotnet-trace`](../diagnostics/dotnet-trace.md) tool.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`dotnet-trace`](../diagnostics/dotnet-trace.md) tool
```

> [!NOTE]

> >

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> > For more details on usage of `dotnet-trace` please refer to [`dotnet-trace`](../diagnostics/dotnet-trace.md) tool documentation.  The scope of `dotnet-trace` capabilities is greater than collecting detailed assembly loading information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> The scope of `dotnet-trace` capabilities is greater than collecting detailed assembly loading information. For more information on the usage of `dotnet-trace`, see [`dotnet-trace`](../diagnostics/dotnet-trace.md).
```

## Collect a trace with assembly loading events

> ### Trace an existing process

Reviewer: ```suggestion

You can use `dotnet-trace` to trace an existing process or to launch a child process and trace it from startup.

### Trace an existing process
```

## Prerequisites

- [.NET 5.0 SDK](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/download) or later versions
- [`dotnet-trace`](../diagnostics/dotnet-trace.md) tool

> [!NOTE]
> The scope of `dotnet-trace` capabilities is greater than collecting detailed assembly loading information. For more information on the usage of `dotnet-trace`, see [`dotnet-trace`](../diagnostics/dotnet-trace.md).

## Collect a trace with assembly loading events

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Collect a trace with assembly loading events

> ### Tracing an existing process

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Trace an existing process
```

This will collect a trace of the specified `<pid>`, enabling the `AssemblyLoader` events in the `Microsoft-Windows-DotNETRuntime` provider. The result is a `.nettrace` file.

> ### Using dotnet-trace to launch a child process and trace it from startup

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Use dotnet-trace to launch a child process and trace it from startup
```

> Sometimes it may be useful to collect a trace of a process from its startup. For apps running .NET 5.0 or later, it is possible to do this by using dotnet-trace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes it may be useful to collect a trace of a process from its startup. For apps running .NET 5.0 or later, you can use dotnet-trace to do this.
```

Switched to active voice.

> This will launch hello.exe with arg1 and arg2 as its command line arguments and collect a trace from its runtime startup:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following command launches hello.exe with `arg1` and `arg2` as its command line arguments and collects a trace from its runtime startup:
```

> ```console

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```console
```

dotnet-trace collect --providers Microsoft-Windows-DotNETRuntime:4 -- hello.exe arg1 arg2
```

> You can stop collecting the trace by pressing <kbd>Enter</kbd> or <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>C</kbd> key. Doing this will also exit hello.exe.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can stop collecting the trace by pressing <kbd>Enter</kbd> or <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>C</kbd>. This also closes hello.exe.
```

> [!NOTE]

> > * Launching hello.exe via dotnet-trace will redirect its input/output and you will not be able to interact with it on the console by default. Use the `--show-child-io` switch to interact with its stdin/stdout.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>
> * Launching hello.exe via dotnet-trace will redirect its input and output, and you won't be able to interact with it on the console by default. Use the `--show-child-io` switch to interact with its `stdin` and `stdout`.
```

This will collect a trace of the specified `<pid>`, enabling the `AssemblyLoader` events in the `Microsoft-Windows-DotNETRuntime` provider. The result is a `.nettrace` file.

> ### Use dotnet-trace to launch a child process and trace it from startup

Reviewer 2: While I appreciate the desire to have only one doc to follow, I do think this should include a link to the documentation for `dotnet-trace` which has much more detail in it (and is likely to be more up to date, inevitably this doc will get stale as it's a copy of the stuff from the `dotnet-trace` doc).

Author: @vitek-karas Why would it get stale?

I can't tell from your feedback what you want done exactly.  This page addresses the specific use case of how to collect details around dependency loading.  This is a pretty big user story.  The fact that `dotnet-trace` is its own tool that collapses assembly fusion loading story doesn't change the fact there is a need for a page to clearly explain the big user story.  I think rather than debate one vs. two pages the debate should focus on search engine optimization to make sure common search terms for this problem actually direct people to this page.  When you dedicate a page to a user story, nobody can then come along and just wipe out the content without realizing the context.  Just my 2 cents.

Reviewer 2: As I said I think it's a good idea to keep a simple guide how to do things on this one page. But I do believe it should also contain something like "For more details on usage of `dotnet-trace` please refer to https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/diagnostics/dotnet-trace" (or if there's a section more appropriate then point to that).

As for it getting stale. People who work on `dotnet-trace` will update its documentation, but they are not going to remember to update this page if needed. It's not a huge concern as I don't think we would change the command line options to `dotnet-trace` without a really good reason, but still - it's at least worth the additional link.

Author: Got it.  I will update to include the link back to dotnet-trace.  I think I misunderstood what you were saying, forgive me.

Author: I added a note under the prerequisites section.

> Sometimes it may be useful to collect a trace of a process from its startup. For apps running .NET 5.0 or later, you can use dotnet-trace to do this.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Sometimes it may be useful to collect a trace of a process from its startup. For apps running .NET 5.0 or later, you can use `dotnet-trace` to do this.
```

The following command launches hello.exe with `arg1` and `arg2` as its command line arguments and collects a trace from its runtime startup:

```console
dotnet-trace collect --providers Microsoft-Windows-DotNETRuntime:4 -- hello.exe arg1 arg2
```

> You can stop collecting the trace by pressing <kbd>Enter</kbd> or <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>C</kbd>. This also closes hello.exe.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can stop collecting the trace by pressing <kbd>Enter</kbd> or <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>C</kbd>. This also closes _hello.exe_.
```

> This will collect a trace of the specified `<pid>`, enabling the `AssemblyLoader` events in the `Microsoft-Windows-DotNETRuntime` provider. The result is a `.nettrace` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command collects a trace of the specified `<pid>`, enabling the `AssemblyLoader` events in the `Microsoft-Windows-DotNETRuntime` provider. The result is a `.nettrace` file.
```

### Use dotnet-trace to launch a child process and trace it from startup

Sometimes it may be useful to collect a trace of a process from its startup. For apps running .NET 5.0 or later, you can use `dotnet-trace` to do this.

> The following command launches hello.exe with `arg1` and `arg2` as its command line arguments and collects a trace from its runtime startup:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following command launches *hello.exe* with `arg1` and `arg2` as its command line arguments and collects a trace from its runtime startup:
```

```console
dotnet-trace collect --providers Microsoft-Windows-DotNETRuntime:4 -- hello.exe arg1 arg2
```

You can stop collecting the trace by pressing <kbd>Enter</kbd> or <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>C</kbd>. This also closes _hello.exe_.

> [!NOTE]
>

> > * Launching hello.exe via dotnet-trace will redirect its input and output, and you won't be able to interact with it on the console by default. Use the `--show-child-io` switch to interact with its `stdin` and `stdout`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> * Launching *hello.exe* via `dotnet-trace` redirects its input and output, and you won't be able to interact with it on the console by default. Use the `--show-child-io` switch to interact with its `stdin` and `stdout`.
```

> > * Exiting the tool via CTRL+C or SIGTERM will safely end both the tool and the child process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> * Exiting the tool via <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>+<kbd>C</kbd> or `SIGTERM` safely ends both the tool and the child process.
```

> > * If the child process exits before the tool, the tool will exit as well and the trace should be safely viewable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> * If the child process exits before the tool, the tool exits as well and the trace should be safely viewable.
```
